                                    Operating SyStem
An operating system (OS) is system software that manages computer hardware, software resources, and provides
common services for computer programs. So, it manages the computer’s memory, processes, devices, files, and
security aspects of the system. It also allows us to communicate with the computer without knowing how to speak
the computer’s language. Without an operating system, a computer is not useful.

Types of OS :-
   1. Batch Operating System : This type of operating system does not interact with the computer directly. There
      is an operator which takes similar jobs having the same requirement and groups them into batches. It is the
      responsibility of the operator to sort jobs with similar needs.
      Advantages: Multiple users can share the batch systems. The idle time for the batch system is very less.
      Easy to manage large work repeatedly in batch systems.
      Disadvantages: The computer operators should be well known with batch systems. Batch systems are hard
      to debug and its costly. The other jobs will have to wait for an unknown time if any job fails.
      Example: Payroll Systems.




   2. Multi-Programming Operating System: More than one program is present in the main memory and any
      one of them can be kept in execution. This is basically used for better execution of resources.
      This helps in reducing response time.
      Example: Windows
   3. Multi-Processing Operating System: More than one CPU is used for the execution of resources. It betters
      the throughput of the System.
      Advantages: It increases the throughput of the system. As it has several processors, so, if one processor
      fails, we can proceed with another processor.
      Disadvantages: But due to the multiple CPU, it can be more complex and somehow difficult to understand.
      Example: Windows NT/2000/XP, Unix, etc.




   4. Multi-Tasking Operating System: It is a multiprogramming Operating System with having facility of a Round-
      Robin Scheduling Algorithm. It can run multiple programs simultaneously.
      Advantages: Multiple Programs can be executed simultaneously in Multi-Tasking Operating System. It
      comes with proper memory management.
      Disadvantages: The system gets heated in case of heavy programs multiple times.
   Example: Microsoft Windows.




5. Time-Sharing Operating System: In this, tasks are assigned specific time intervals to run smoothly. Each
   user is allocated CPU time when they use the system. The allocated time for each task is known as a
   quantum. Whether it is a single user or multiple users, the operating system switches to the next task once
   the quantum time interval is completed.
   Advantages: Equal opportunity to all tasks, CPU idle time reduced, allowed resource sharing.
   Disadvantages: Reliability Problem, High-Overload, Complexity, and security risks.
   Example: Windows terminal Service.
6. Distributed Operating System: This operating system is a recent advancement in computer technology. It
   connects computers through a shared network, allowing them to communicate. Each computer has its own
   memory and CPU. It is called a distributed system. The key benefit is remote access, where users can access
   files or software on other connected systems.
   Advantages: Failure of one will not affect the other network communication, as all systems are independent
   of each other. Since resources are being shared, computation is highly fast and durable. These systems are
   easily scalable as many systems can be easily added to the network.
   Disadvantages: Expensive. Failure of the main network will stop the entire communication.
   Example: LOCUS (This OS focuses on Resource Management and Load Balancing, developed by University
   of California).




7. Network Operating System: A network operating system is a type of operating system that runs on a server
   and helps manage various networking functions. It allows users to share files, printers, applications, and
   security features within a small private network. One important characteristic of network operating systems
   is that all users have knowledge of the network's configuration, other users' connections, and individual
   settings.
   Advantages: Highly stable, secure, new systems can be easily integrated. Server can be accessed remotely.
   Disadvantages: Expensive, Regular maintenance.
   Examples: Windows 2008, Mac OS X, Linux, etc.
8. Real-Time Operating System: These types of OS serve real-time systems. The time interval required to
   process and respond to inputs is very small. This time interval is called response time. Real-time systems
   are used when there are time requirements that are very strict.
   Example: Missile Systems, Air Traffic Control Systems, etc.
   Types:
   Hard Real-Time Systems: They are meant for applications where time constraints are very-very strict like
   automatic parachutes, airbags, etc.
   Soft Real-Time Systems: These OSs are for applications where time-constraint is less strict.
   Advantages: Memory management, fast process, Error free systems, etc.
       Disadvantages: Heavy and expensive resources required, Complex algorithms.
Difference between Multiprogramming, multitasking, multithreading, and multiprocessing:




Socket :-
A socket is an endpoint for communication between processes over a network. When two processes want to
communicate, they each use a socket, which is identified by an IP address and a port number. In the case of a
server, it listens on a designated port for incoming client requests. When a request is received, the server accepts
the connection from the client's socket, allowing communication to take place.

Kernel :-
The kernel is the central core component of an operating system. It plays a crucial role in managing computer
operations and hardware. The kernel acts as a bridge between user-level applications and the hardware,
facilitating communication between them. It also handles important tasks such as managing memory and CPU
time allocation. Additionally, the kernel determines the state of incoming processes and controls essential
components like disk, memory, and task management within the operating system.

Monolithic Kernel :-
A monolithic kernel is a type of kernel where all the operating system services operate within the kernel space. It
is known for providing good performance but has a large amount of code, making it complex. In a monolithic
kernel, there are dependencies between different system components, which can make it challenging to modify
or debug. Examples: Linux, Unix, etc.



Program :-
Program is a set of instructions to perform a certain task. Example: Chrome.exe
Process :-
Process is an instance of an executing program. For example, we write our computer programs in a text file and
when we execute this program, it becomes a process which performs all the tasks mentioned in the program.

Thread :-
Thread is a path of execution within a process. A thread is also known as a lightweight process. The idea is to
achieve parallelism by dividing a process into multiple threads. For example, in autosave thread, it saves the
user's work automatically, ensuring that the document is saved at regular intervals without interrupting the user's
editing experience.



Virtual Memory :-
Virtual memory is a computer technique that allows a computer to use more memory than it physically has. It
creates a simulated memory space on the hard disk that acts like extra RAM. The main benefit is that programs
can be larger than the actual physical memory. Virtual memory serves two purposes: it extends the use of
physical memory by utilizing the disk, and it provides memory protection by translating virtual addresses to
physical addresses. This allows programs to run smoothly even if there is not enough physical memory available,
and it helps prevent one program from interfering with or accessing the memory of another program.

Thrashing :-
Thrashing is when the system is overwhelmed with handling page faults, resulting in minimal actual work being
accomplished.
⦿Handling page faults refer to the process by which a computer system manages memory when a program or
process requests data that is not currently present in physical memory (RAM). When a page fault occurs, the
system needs to retrieve the required data from secondary storage (such as a hard disk) and load it into memory
before the program can proceed.



RAID (Redundant Arrays of Independent Disks) :-
RAID is a technique which makes use of a combination of multiple disks instead of using a single disk for
increased performance, data redundancy or both. Data redundancy, although taking up extra space, adds to disk
reliability. This means, in case of disk failure, if the same data is also backed up onto another disk, we can retrieve
the data and go on with the operation.
Types :-

   •   RAID-0 (Stripping) :-
   •   RAID-1 (Mirroring) :-




   •   RAID-0+1 :-




   •   RAID-1+0 :-




   •   RAID-2 (Bit-Level Stripping with Dedicated Parity) :-
Here As the data is divided at the bit level and not at the block level, the complexity increases. Actually, A
minimum of 39 disks would be required, of which 32 would be for storing individual bits and 7 for error
correction.
   •   RAID-3 (Byte-Level Stripping with Dedicated Parity) :-




   •   RAID-4 (Block-Level Stripping with Dedicated Parity) :-
This configuration is quite like RAID 3, with the exception that here the disk is divided into blocks, not bytes. This
allows each disk in the set to function independently of the rest.




   •   RAID-5 (Block-Level Stripping with Distributed Parity) :-




   •   RAID-6 (Block-Level Stripping with two Parity Bits) :-




Deadlock :-
A Deadlock is a situation where each of the computer processes waits for a resource which is being assigned to
some other process. In this situation, none of the processes gets executed since the resource it needs is held by
some other process which is also waiting for some other resource to be released.
Starvation :-
Starvation is a situation where the low priority process got blocked and the high priority processes proceed.

⦿Ageing (Solution to Starvation) is a technique of gradually increasing the priority of processes that wait in the
system for a long time. The idea behind ageing is to give older processes a higher priority so that they eventually
receive their fair share of CPU time, even if they have been waiting for a while.
Difference between Deadlock and Starvation :-




Different Conditions for a Deadlock :-

   1. Mutual Exclusion: A resource can only be shared in mutually exclusive manner. It implies, if two process
      cannot use the same resource at the same time.
   2. Hold and Wait: A process waits for some resources while holding another resource at the same time.
   3. No preemption: The process which once scheduled will be executed till the completion. No other process
      can be scheduled by the scheduler meanwhile.
   4. Circular Wait: All the processes must be waiting for the resources in a cyclic manner so that the last
      process is waiting for the resource which is being held by the first process.

Methods for Handling Deadlocks :-

   1) Deadlock Prevention: The idea is to not let the system into a deadlock state. This system will make sure
      that above mentioned four conditions will not arise. By eliminating mutual exclusion, allow preemption,
      solve hold and wait, and circular wait solution.
   2) Deadlock Avoidance: Avoidance is kind of futuristic. By using the strategy of “Avoidance,” we must
      assume. We need to ensure that all information about resources that the process will need is known to us
      before the execution of the process. We use Banker’s algorithm (Which is in turn a gift from Dijkstra) to
      avoid deadlock.
      In prevention and avoidance, we get the correctness of data but performance decreases.
   3) Deadlock detection and recovery: If Deadlock prevention or avoidance is not applied to the software then
      we can handle this by deadlock detection and recovery. which consist of two phases:
      In the first phase, we examine the state of the process and check whether there is a deadlock or not in the
      system.
      If found deadlock in the first phase then we apply the algorithm for recovery of the deadlock.
    4) Deadlock ignorance: If a deadlock is very rare, then let it happen and reboot the system. This is the
       approach that both Windows and UNIX take. They use the ostrich algorithm for deadlock ignorance.
       In Deadlock, ignorance performance is better than the above methods, but not the correctness.

⦿Safe State: A safe state can be defined as a state in which there is no deadlock.



Fragmentation :-
The condition of fragmentation depends on the memory allocation system. As the process is loaded and
unloaded from memory, these empty areas are fragmented into small pieces of memory and due to the small
size, it cannot be allocated to incoming processes. It is called fragmentation. So, the memory spaces remain
unused and forms inefficient memory use.
Types of Fragmentation :-

•   External Fragmentation: It occurs when free memory is scattered throughout the system in small, non-
    contiguous chunks. The total amount of free memory might be sufficient to fulfill a memory request, but the
    scattered nature of the available blocks makes it challenging to find a single contiguous block large enough to
    satisfy the request. This can lead to wasted memory and inefficient memory utilization.
•   Internal Fragmentation: It happens when allocated memory blocks are larger than the actual space needed
    by a process, so the process does not fully utilize the entire block. As a result, there is unused or wasted
    memory within each allocated block. This unused memory is referred to as internal fragmentation.



Spooling :-
SPOOL is an acronym for simultaneous peripheral operations online.
Spooling is a process in which data is temporarily held to be used and executed by a device, program, or system.
In spooling, there is no interaction between the I/O devices and the CPU. That means there is no need for the
CPU to wait for the I/O operations to take place. Such operations take a long time to finish executing, so the CPU
will not wait for them to finish.
Example: Printing. The documents which are to be printed are stored in the SPOOL and then added to the queue
for printing. During this time, many processes can perform their operations and use the CPU without waiting
while the printer executes the printing process on the documents one-by-one.



Semaphores :-
Semaphores are just normal variables used to coordinate the activities of multiple processes in a computer
system. They are used to enforce mutual exclusion, avoid race conditions, and implement synchronization
between processes.
The process of using Semaphores provides two operations: wait (P) and signal (V). The wait operation
decrements the value of the semaphore, and the signal operation increments the value of the semaphore. When
the value of the semaphore is zero, any process that performs a wait operation will be blocked until another
process performs a signal operation.
Semaphores are of two types :-

•   Binary Semaphore: This is also known as a mutex lock. It can have only two values – 0 and 1. Its value is
    initialized to 1. It is used to implement the solution of critical section problems with multiple processes.
•   Counting Semaphore: Its value can range over an unrestricted domain. It is used to control access to a
    resource that has multiple instances.




Mutex (Mutual Exclusion Object) :-
Mutex is a specific kind of binary semaphore that is used to provide a locking mechanism. It stands for Mutual
Exclusion Object. Mutex is mainly used to provide mutual exclusion to a specific portion of the code, so that
process can execute and work with a particular section of the code at a particular time.

⦿Binary semaphore and mutex is different. Maybe due to the implementation mutex may be referred to as a
binary semaphore.
Differences between Mutex and Semaphore :-
Belady’s Anomaly :-
Belady’s anomaly is the name given to the phenomenon where increasing the number of page frames (Page
frames represent the available slots in physical memory where pages can be loaded), results in an increase in the
number of page faults for a given memory access pattern.
Solution to fix Belady’s Anomaly :-
Implementing alternative page replacement algo helps eliminate Belady’s Anomaly. Use of stack-based
algorithms, such as Optimal Page Replacement Algorithm and Least Recently Used (LRU) algorithm, can eliminate
the issue of increased page faults as these algorithms assign priority to pages.



Paging :-
Paging is a memory management technique where the virtual address space of a process is divided into fixed-size
blocks called pages, which are then mapped to the physical memory (RAM) in the system. It allows for efficient
allocation of memory by breaking it into smaller, uniform units.
Paging is used for faster access to data. When a program needs a page, it is available in the main memory(RAM)
as the OS copies a certain number of pages from your storage device to main memory. Paging allows the physical
address space of a process to be noncontiguous.



Demand Paging :-
Demand paging is a method of virtual memory management which is based on the principle that pages should
only be brought into memory if the executing process demands them. This is often referred to as lazy evaluation
as only those pages demanded by the process are swapped from secondary storage to main memory.
So demand paging works opposite to the principle of loading all pages immediately.



Segmentation :-
Segmentation is a memory management technique in which the memory is divided into the variable size parts.
Each part is known as a segment which can be allocated to a process.

The details about each segment are stored in a table called a segment table. Segment table is stored in one (or
many) of the segments.

Segment table contains mainly two information about segment:

Base: It is the base address of the segment
Limit: It is the length of the segment.
Difference between Primary Memory (RAM, ROM, etc.) and Secondary Memory (Hard Disks, Floppy
Disks, etc.) :-




Static Binding and Dynamic Binding :-
Static binding happens when the code is compiled, while dynamic bind happens when the code is executed at run
time.
Static Binding :-
When a compiler acknowledges all the information required to call a function or all the values of the variables
during compile time, it is called “static binding”. As all the required information is known before runtime, it
increases the program efficiency and it also enhances the speed of execution of a program. Static Binding makes a
program very efficient, but it declines the program flexibility, as ‘values of variable’ and ‘function calling’ are
predefined in the program. Static binding is implemented in a program at the time of coding. Overloading a
function or an operator is the example of compile time polymorphism i.e., static binding.
Dynamic Binding :-
Calling a function or assigning a value to a variable, at run-time is called “Dynamic Binding”. Dynamic binding can
be associated with run time ‘polymorphism’ and ‘inheritance’ in OOP. Dynamic binding makes the execution of a
program flexible as it can decide what value should be assigned to the variable and which function should be
called, at the time of program execution. But as this information is provided at run time it makes the execution
slower as compared to static binding.



Scheduling :-
Process Scheduling is the process of the process manager handling the removal of an active process from the CPU
and selecting another process based on a specific strategy.
Terminologies :-

•   Arrival Time: Time at which the process arrives in the ready queue.
•   Completion Time: Time at which process completes its execution.
•   Burst Time: Time required by a process for CPU execution.
•   Turn Around Time = Completion Time – Arrival Time
•   Waiting Time = Turn Around Time – Burst Time
Types :-
    1. FCFS (First Come First Serve): Tasks are always executed on a First-come, First-serve concept.
    2. SJF (Shortest Job First): Executes tasks with shortest burst time.
    3. LJF (Longest Job First): Opposite of SJF.
    4. Priority Scheduling: Schedules tasks based on priority. When the higher priority work arrives while a task
       with less priority is executed, the higher priority work takes the place of the less priority one. Lower is the
       number assigned, higher is the priority level of a process. And in case the priority number is same for few
       tasks then FCFS is followed.
    5. RR (Round Robin): It is a CPU scheduling algorithm where each process is cyclically assigned a fixed time
       (quantum time) slot. It focuses on Time Sharing technique. Deciding quantum time may be difficult for
       this algorithm but it does not give special priority to more important tasks.
    6. SRTF (Shortest Remaining Time First): Tasks are executed first by seeing their remaining time of process.
    7. LRTF (Longest Remaining Time First): Opposite of SRTF.

Producer-Consumer Problem :-
The job of the Producer is to generate the data, put it into the buffer, and again start generating data. While the
job of the Consumer is to consume the data from the buffer.
The producer should produce data only when the buffer is not full. If the buffer is full, then the producer should
not be allowed to put any data into the buffer. The consumer should consume data only when the buffer is not
empty. If the buffer is empty, then the consumer should not be allowed to take any data from the buffer.
The producer and consumer should not access the buffer at the same time.
This can be solved by using semaphores.



Banker’s Algorithm :-
It is a banker algorithm used to avoid deadlock and allocate resources safely to each process in the computer
system. It examines all possible tests or activities before deciding whether the allocation should be allowed to
each process. It also helps the operating system to successfully share the resources between all the processes.
The banker’s algorithm is named because it checks whether a person should be sanctioned a loan amount or not
to help the bank system safely simulate allocation resources.
Cache :-
Cache memory is an extremely fast memory type that acts as a buffer between RAM and the CPU. It holds
frequently requested data and instructions so that they are immediately available to the CPU when needed.

Cookies :-
Cookies are small pieces of text sent to your browser by a website you visit. They help that website remember
information about your visit, which can both make it easier to visit the site again and make the site more useful to
you.

Cache Mapping :-
The process /technique of bringing data of main memory blocks into the cache block is known as cache mapping.

The mapping techniques can be classified as :-

•   Direct Mapping: Each block from main memory has only one possible place in the cache organization in this
    technique. It is simple, fast, and less expensive.
•   Associative Mapping: Here the mapping of the main memory block can be done with any of the cache block.
    The memory address has only 2 fields here: word & tag. This technique is called as fully associative cache
    mapping. It is easy and faster.
•   Set-Associative Mapping: It is the combination of advantages of both direct & associative mapping.
    Here, the cache consists of a number sets, each of which consists of several blocks. It gives best performance
    but expensive.
